updated draft for setup instructions (#48)
carpentries-incubator/r-geospatial-urban: learners/setup.md

# Overview

This workshop is designed to be run on your local machine. For this, you need to (i) download the geospatial data we use in the workshop and (ii) set up your machine with the software required to analyse and process the data. We provide installation instructions below for these steps. Please read carefully before installing anything!

## Data

Download the [data zip file](https://surfdrive.surf.nl/files/index.php/s/G2zgWK7SrHsSOSh) and unzip it to your Desktop. The file is 67.5 MB.

## Software

> We provide quick instructions below for installing the various software needed for this workshop. They assume minimal familiarity with the command line and with installation in general. As there are different operating systems and many different versions of operating systems and environments, these may not work on your computer. If an installation doesn't work for you, please refer to the installation instructions for that software listed in the table above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We provide quick instructions below for installing the various software needed for this workshop. They assume minimal familiarity with the command line and with installation in general. As there are different operating systems and many different versions of operating systems and environments, these may not work on your computer. If an installation doesn't work for you, please refer to the installation instructions for that software listed in the table on the bottom of this page.
```

Note for MacOS users: The workshop is only testes for macOS 11 and above. If you have an older version please contact the workshop providers prior to the start of the workshop. 

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: discussion

### GDAL, GEOS, and PROJ.4

The installation of the geospatial libraries GDAL, GEOS, and PROJ.4 varies significantly based on operating system. These are all dependencies for `sf`, the `R` package that we will be using for spatial data operations throughout this workshop. If you already have one of these libaries in your system, please make sure to uninstall it before following the instructions below. Otherwise you might have conflicts between your libraries. If uninstallation is not possible, please join to the pre-workshop installation meeting. 

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::: solution

### Windows

> To install the geospatial libraries GDAL, GEOS, and PROJ.4, install Rtools version 4.3 [RTools](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/)

Reviewer: I tedted 4.4.0 and it works. Also added to the github action in #51

> To install the geospatial libraries GDAL, GEOS, and PROJ.4, install Rtools version 4.3 [RTools](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install the geospatial libraries GDAL, GEOS, and PROJ.4, install Rtools version 4.4 [RTools](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/)
```

### R

> Participants who do not already have `R` installed should download and install the latest version. For those who already have R installed, make sure to have at least version 4.3.3. If not, please upgrade. You can check your R version by typing the following code in your R console. 

Reviewer: Let's test 4.4.0 and update this if it works.

Reviewer: I tedted 4.4.0 and it works. Also added to the github action in #51

> Participants who do not already have `R` installed should download and install the latest version. For those who already have R installed, make sure to have at least version 4.3.3. If not, please upgrade. You can check your R version by typing the following code in your R console. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Participants who do not already have `R` installed should download and install the latest version. For those who already have R installed, make sure to have at least version 4.4.0. If not, please upgrade. You can check your R version by typing the following code in your R console. 
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

You are now ready for the workshop!

> Below is a summary of what have been installed in your machine at the end of the above instructions. Please DO NOT install the software in the table individually before reading through the instructions.If you have installed Rtools as a windows user, you do not have to install the GDAL, GEOS and PROJ.4 libaries individually. For other OS users, please see the instructions above and the installation manuals in the table below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a summary table of what have been installed in your machine after following the instructions above. Please use this summary for reference and DO NOT install the software from it unless you encounter issues with the installation above. The links in the table provide more detailed software- and platform-specific information.
```
